---
icon: calendar-days
---

# What to consider before conducting environmental monitoring?

## Description

Environmental monitoring involves the systematic observation, measurement, and analysis of various environmental parameters such as air, water, soil, and biodiversity to assess the health and quality of ecosystems and their interactions with human activities. It encompasses a range of techniques and tools, including sensors, remote sensing, sampling, and data analysis, to monitor changes over time and space. The primary goals of environmental monitoring are to identify environmental hazards, track trends in environmental quality, assess the effectiveness of regulatory measures and management strategies, and ultimately, to support informed decision-making aimed at protecting and preserving the environment for present and future generations.

Establishing the aim of the data collection is critical to ensure that later the data is fit-for purpose. This involves getting clear what the research question is, who should be involved, and how data should be collected, processed, and used.

## Why is this relevant?

Understanding why data is collected and by whom, and how it helps to ensure the usefulness for the intended analysis or decision-making process. It helps in preventing biases, errors, and misunderstandings in data interpretation. All of them are important factors to create and increase trust among the different participants and stakeholders of the Citizen Observatory/Citizen Science project.

## How can this be done?

Below are some of the considerations that are important when conducting environmental monitoring.

1. **Engage stakeholders such as local communities, government agencies, industry partners and non-governmental organizations:** Determine which parties should be involved. Involve all these participants in the design of the project, the follow-up and the communication about it. By working with each other everyone has the same ideas and expectations (see [Who is who in air quality environmental mapping?](who-is-who-in-air-quality-environmental-monitoring.md)).
2. **Determine the research question:** before initiating any monitoring program, it's essential to have a clear understanding of what you aim to achieve. The research question determines what needs to be measured why, with what, and how. If the question is not clear, then the measurements may not produce the desired result. So, before you start, define with the participants the research question as precisely as possible. Preferably, limit the research question to a single topic or theme. Also check whether the research question is actually measurable (see [How to ask the right questions in air quality monitoring?](how-to-ask-the-right-questions-in-air-quality-monitoring.md)).
3. **Define clear objectives and goals for the monitoring effort**: define what you want to achieve with the data collection. Don't wait to have data to start thinking about why you are collecting it and what you want to do with it. The objective of the data collection will impact the methodology used for its collection. For example, if your objective is to study personal exposure to air pollution, you might need a wearable sensor and a sampling time that is less than 1 hour. (see[ What variables can be measured with air quality sensing devices?](../sensing-devices/what-variables-can-be-measured-with-air-quality-sensing-devices.md)).
4. **Identify the specific environmental parameters of interest and how you can monitor them:** the research question determines how we plan our monitoring, i.e. what to measure, when to measure, how to measure. For example, in air quality, if the question is about road traffic, you may want to measure nitrogen dioxide (NO₂), and possibly noise, but fine particulate matter (PM2.5) is less important. If your concern is about wood burning, particulate matter PM₂.₅ is a good choice. Also consider how long or when you need to measure, to see the desired results. For air quality, factors such as the season and the weather affect the concentrations levels. All these factors determine which instrument is the best choice for the project. (see [What variables can be measured with air quality sensing devices?,](../sensing-devices/what-variables-can-be-measured-with-air-quality-sensing-devices.md) and [What are the main elements of a sensing device?](../sensing-devices/what-are-the-main-elements-of-a-sensing-device.md)).
5. **Determine the spatial and temporal scales of monitoring:** consider the geographic extent over which you need to monitor and how frequently data should be collected. This will depend on factors such as the size of the area of interest, the rate of environmental change, and the availability of resources.
6. **Establish robust protocols for data collection, quality assurance and data management:** these will depend on the chosen method. Installation guidelines are usually necessary for sensor devices. But also, instructions on where and how to locate the instrument are useful. For wearables, instructions should cover when, where, how and under what circumstances devices should be used. For passive samplers, a time schedule for when to replace the samplers should be provided.
7. **Keep it simple:** the simpler the instructions are, the easier for people to follow it. If people are overwhelmed or frustrated, you risk losing your precious community. Breaking the protocol in simple steps that are easy to understand and follow. As people are gaining experience, you can include more complex scenarios. Make sure the rules are clear, use engaging visuals and interactions to make sure instructions are clear for everyone, by testing them first.
8. **Test small before large implementations:** before engaging with a large community in environmental monitoring, start with a small user group representative of your final community. Let them test your instructions and identify potential problems in all the steps.
9. **Provide training and support:** provide sufficient training and support. This will also help to engage your community. Often there are people in the community that are really skilled and that are prepared to help other people in the neighbourhood.
10. **Check data as often as possible:** do not wait until the end of the project but check the data early on together with the community. This will allow you to identify early problems such as whether the sensors are sending data, minimizing data loss. Give feedback so participants know if anything needs to be improved.
11. **Maintain Engagement:** participants' engagement tends to erode over time. Engage with your community to see if they need more assistance. Apart from checking the data, try to analyze the data with them, and revisit the research questions. Are these still the questions they have? Be flexible and make updates as the community is advancing to define new objectives. Discuss with them about the actions they want to do after collecting and analysing the data.
12. **Communicate transparently to foster collaboration and support for the monitoring initiative:** effective communication is key to building trust and gaining support for environmental monitoring efforts. Keep stakeholders informed about the purpose and progress of the monitoring program, share findings in a clear and accessible manner, and solicit feedback to address concerns and improve the effectiveness of the monitoring effort.
13. **Keep the budget in mind:** allocate adequate resources including personnel, equipment, and funding. Environmental monitoring requires sufficient resources to be effective. Ensure you have the necessary personnel trained in monitoring techniques, access to appropriate equipment and technology for data collection, and adequate funding to support ongoing monitoring activities. Make sure to understand the budgetary needs for your project.
14. **Evaluate the project:** when the measurement project is completed, evaluate the project with all participating parties. Did everything go satisfactorily, and why or why not? Revisit the agreements made at the beginning of the project. Have new research questions arisen? See if it is possible to set up a follow-up project.

## Useful resources

* "Air Sensor Guidebook for the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)": This guidebook offers comprehensive insights into the use of air sensors, including low-cost options, for environmental monitoring. It covers sensor selection, deployment strategies, data interpretation, and limitations [https://cfpub.epa.gov/si/si\_public\_record\_report.cfm?Lab=CEMM\&dirEntryId=356426](https://cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_record_report.cfm?Lab=CEMM\&dirEntryId=356426) p40
* "A guide to sitting and installing air sensors (Air Sensor Toolbox)": When you selected the appropriate sensors for a community initiative, decisions about where to place to site -whether outdoors or indoors- can significantly impact the representativeness of the measuremnt and data quality. This guide outlines key logistical considerations and provides recommendations to help determine where a sensor should be placed and installed. [https://www.epa.gov/air-sensor-toolbox/guide-siting-and-installing-air-sensors](https://www.epa.gov/air-sensor-toolbox/guide-siting-and-installing-air-sensors). 
* How to set up a new measurement group [Hollandse-Luchten-Handboek-september-2022.pdf](https://hollandse-luchten.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/9/Hollandse-Luchten-Handboek-september-2022.pdf)
* Citizen Sensing – a toolkit on how to set up a citizen sensing project from begin to end [Citizen Sensing (waag.org)](https://waag.org/sites/waag/files/2018-03/Citizen-Sensing-A-Toolkit.pdf)
* Tool to analyze Citizen Science data, for example look at wind directions, group and average data, look at weekly patterns etc. [Samen Analyseren Tool (samenmeten.nl)](https://analyseren.samenmeten.nl/)

## You might also be interested in…

* [How to ask the right questions in air quality monitoring?](how-to-ask-the-right-questions-in-air-quality-monitoring.md)
* [Who is who in air quality environmental mapping?](who-is-who-in-air-quality-environmental-monitoring.md)
* [What are the main elements of a sensing device?](../sensing-devices/what-are-the-main-elements-of-a-sensing-device.md)
* [What variables can be measured with air quality sensing devices?](../sensing-devices/what-variables-can-be-measured-with-air-quality-sensing-devices.md)
* [How to promote involvement and participation in environmental monitoring to minimize data gaps?](../community/how-to-promote-involvement-and-participation-in-environmental-monitoring-to-minimize-data-gaps.md)
