---
icon: memo-circle-check
---

# What non-technical aspects to consider when choosing sensing devices?

## Description

When talking about sensor devices, we may only think about how well they perform, or how many features they have. As important as these aspects are, however, they may not always be the only factors to evaluate. Other factors are to be considered such as the principles under which the devices are designed and manufactured, their data policies, or the existence of an already existing monitoring community, are described in this section. These principles are complementary to the device’s ease of use or cost, which are also important factors to keep in mind in the device selection process.

## Why is this relevant?

By considering technical aspects alongside non-technical considerations, we can make more informed choices of sensing devices that not only align with our monitoring goals, but also consider integral factors that can help to sustain the project over time, such as community support, or the absence of vendor locks. This will have direct consequences on our budget, resources needed, and ultimately enhance the effectiveness and long-term impact of our environmental monitoring initiatives.

## How can this be done?

When choosing sensing devices for air quality monitoring, several non-technical aspects could be considered to support the choice of a solution for the monitoring initiative:

1. **Cost:** Assess the initial cost of the device, as well as any additional expenses for maintenance, calibration, assembly, and data management. Consider the overall cost-of the device in relation to the monitoring objectives and available budget, and make sure to consider long term aspects, such as the availability of data free-of-charge in the long term, or specific services with regards to analytics. Finally, consider the cost of replacements, which in the event of an issue, or the end-of-life of certain sensing elements, can have a significant cost.
2. **Ease of use:** Evaluate the user-friendliness of the device, including the simplicity of its setup and operation processes and data interpretation. If you are working with diverse profiles in terms of experience or dexterity with technology, it’s better to choose devices that are intuitive and accessible to non-technical users.
3. **Deployment site:** If the device is to be deployed in outdoor or harsh environments, choose devices that are robust and can resist adverse environmental conditions such as extreme temperature, humidity, or dust. If the device is to be carried (or worn) by someone, account for their appearance, size, weight, comfort, and other aspects that can affect the motivation for people to carry the device for a (long) period. Finally, check if the device can be installed where you envision it: if it can be mounted on a street pole, or hung on a wall.
4. **Sensor installation: S**ensor installation may require some additional equipment and authorizations (if you must do installations on street poles for example). Check that as soon as possible in your project planning. Select the right type of attachments as you can't drill holes everywhere.
5. **Data policies:** Evaluate how easily the data collected by the device can be accessed, shared, and ultimately analysed, both in the short and long-term. This is directly linked to open data principles, which are to be considered carefully as in many cases there are additional charges or limitations on data access. Consider if data is shared with third parties, and that the data stored is not potentially affecting anyone’s privacy: for instance, that there are methods to anonymize sensitive data like geo-location, or data that could lead to identification of both users or communities unintentionally. Finally, prioritize devices that support data encryption and access control mechanisms to safeguard sensitive information and ensure compliance with data privacy regulations.
6. **Black box effect:** Assess the transparency of the device’s internal workings and components to mitigate the "black box" effect, where users have limited visibility into how the device operates or how data is processed. Choose devices that provide transparent sensor calibration methods, data processing algorithms, and data validation procedures, allowing users to both understand and validate the process, accuracy and reliability of the final measurements. Prioritize devices with good documentation and open-source firmware, enabling users to audit and verify the device's behaviour, performance, identify potential issues, biases or errors, and build trust in the data collected. From the manufacturer’s perspective, introducing transparency and accountability in sensor operation and data processing can enhance confidence in the reliability and integrity of air quality monitoring data.
7. **Community:** Assess the potential for using a device that has a strong community behind it. Joining an already existing community might be highly beneficial, for the sheer aspect of joining a collective with a shared experience, which generally provides support to its members. Beyond that, an additional benefit for joining a community-backed project is that, when multiple devices of the same type are used, their data can be easily compared, calibrated, averaged, or corrected. This is because they all function similarly, allowing you to anticipate and understand the results more effectively.
8. **Support and additional services:** Evaluate the level of support and service provided by the device vendor/monitoring initiative, including technical assistance, warranty coverage, and software updates.
9. **(Open) Documentation:** Evaluate the availability and quality of documentation provided by the device manufacturer or project, including user manuals, technical specifications, and troubleshooting guides. Choose devices that offer comprehensive and well-documented resources to support users in the setup, operation, and maintenance tasks. Additionally, prioritize devices with open designs and implementations, including schematics, well written and commented source code, and well documented APIs, which enable users to customize and extend the functionality of the device. Open documentation fosters transparency and collaboration, empowering users to contribute to device improvement, share knowledge, and address emerging challenges collectively.
10. **Licensing:** Evaluate the licensing terms associated with the sensor device, including any proprietary software or firmware, to ensure compatibility with your goals and values. Opt for devices with open-source licenses that promote transparency, collaboration, and community-driven development. Open-source licenses encourage sharing, modification, and redistribution of software and firmware, empowering users to customize and improve the device's functionality while fostering innovation and knowledge exchange within the community. Additionally, prioritize devices with licensing terms that allow for unrestricted use and modification, enabling broader adoption and participation in environmental monitoring initiatives. By selecting devices with appropriate licensing, organizations can promote openness, flexibility, and sustainability in their monitoring efforts, while avoiding potential legal, economic or ethical constraints associated with proprietary technologies.
11. **Recycling and repairability:** Consider the environmental impact of the device throughout its lifecycle, including its recyclability and repairability. Choose devices that are designed with modular components, easily replaceable parts, and minimal electronic waste generation. Consider the recyclability of the enclosure, or that it does not break any warranty by simply opening it.
12. **Scalability and flexibility:** Consider the scalability and flexibility of the device for future expansion or adaptation of the monitoring program. If a long-term project commitment is envisioned (+2 years), knowing how that may change will be a deciding factor. Choose devices that can accommodate changes in monitoring objectives, technological advancements, and community needs over time.
13. **Business model and project governance:** Consider the governance and business model of the project that creates the devices. Many community sensor projects out there may perform at levels that have nothing to envy to commercial ones, and moreover have a philosophy that may be aligned with other principles such as free and open-source practices, open science, open data or FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable) principles. The relationship between intellectual property, business model and quality, is often biased towards considering that better quality is necessarily related to proprietary models, which is not necessarily true.
14. **Do No Significant Harm (DNSH):** Consider compliance with social safeguards and ensure devices and systems that are employed do not negatively impact the environment. Selecting the materials that are not emit harmful substance, select sensors that have a longer lifespan ensure reduce waste, consider recycle, reuse or replace the components fo the device to avoid electrinic waste. Ensure the collected personal data and location information are properly handled align with general data protection regulation (GDPR). 

## Useful resources

* **Creative Commons**: Creative Commons provides a range of licenses that allow creators to specify how their work can be used, shared, and adapted by others. Their licenses are widely used for various types of content, including data. You can find more information and access their licenses on their website: [Creative Commons](https://creativecommons.org/).
* **Open Data Commons**: Open Data Commons provides legal tools for open data, including licenses and legal agreements tailored specifically for datasets. These licenses are designed to promote the sharing and reuse of data while providing legal clarity for both creators and users. More information is available on their website: [Open Data Commons](https://opendatacommons.org/).

## You might also be interested in….

* [What are the main elements of a sensing device?](what-are-the-main-elements-of-a-sensing-device.md)
* [What technical aspects to consider when choosing an air quality sensing device?](../data-platforms/what-aspects-to-consider-when-choosing-an-infrastructure-or-platform.md)
